Tokyo (CNN) Japan's 85-year-old monarch was born the son of a deity, but he's retiring as the people's Emperor. On Tuesday, Emperor Akihito will abdicate the Chrysanthemum Throne -- the oldest continuoushereditary monarchy in the world -- becoming the first Japanese monarch in modern history to do so. His son, Crown Prince Naruhito, 59, will be inaugurated as the 126th emperor the next day, ushering in the Reiwa era. The much-loved Emperor Akihito will be remembered for connecting with his public in a way that no other Japanese monarch has done and expressing "deep remorse" for the country's actions during World War II. After having heart surgery and overcoming prostate cancer in recent years, the monarch cited health reasons for stepping down. "I am worried that it may become difficult for me to carry out my duties as the symbol of the state with my whole being, as I have done until now," the soft-spoken Emperor said in 2016, in his second TV speech in three decades. It was seen as a plea to Japan's lawmakers to change the law to allow him to retire. The following year, they did. "It won attention and respect from the people, who recognized the emperor actually had a will of his own," said Hitomi Tonomura, a historian at University of Michigan's Center for Japanese Studies. It was a fitting final move for a monarch who had often broken with tradition. He was also the first Japanese Emperor to marry a commoner, speak to his subjects live on television and to be hands-on in raising his children. When the Emperor was born in 1933, Japan was a very different place. War was brewing and his father, Emperor Hirohito, was revered as a human deity. In 1937, Japanese troops invaded Nanjing -- then the capital of the Republic of China -- killing around 300,000 Chinese in a weeks-long spree following the Japanese occupation, according to Chinese estimates. Japan has disputed the scale of the massacre. The emperors were no longer gods -- they were humans. In 1989, Emperor Akihito, was handed a country still dealing with the wounds of war. His reign has been called the Heisei era, which means "achieving peace" -- and it has proved to be a fitting name. "The Emperor has contributed more than all of Japan's prime ministers combined in advancing reconciliation," said Jeremy Yellen, a historian of modern Japan at Chinese University of Hong Kong. "These efforts to restore dignity to Japan's victims has also helped the nation regain a dignity that remains imperiled by revisionists." Throughout his three-decade rule, Emperor Akihito has embraced a more "normal" life. But it was in 2011, as the country reeled from the fatal earthquake and tsunami that saw more than 20,000 people die or go missing, that Akihito truly cemented his reputation as a people's Emperor. Akihito and Michiko traveled to disaster-hit areas, kneeling to talk to survivors face-to-face. "It was like a dream," Fukushima evacuee Ayako Moriie said, describing meeting the royals in the school gymnasium where survivors were staying. "Even though they might be above the clouds where we normally can't reach, it was comforting that they think the same as we do. His words gave us the strength to carry on." Andrew Gordon, a leading scholar of modern Japanese history at Harvard University, said that Akihito's actions had made the Imperial family more accessible. But he cautioned that compared to some monarchies in Europe, Japan's was still a "very distant institution." But the crown prince has shown no hint of harking back to the era of the demi-gods when he ascends to the Japanese throne on May 1. Naruhito has also indicated that he will continue his father's legacy of speaking out against revisionist history of WWII. "I myself did not experience the war," he said on his 55th birthday in 2015. "But I think that it is important today, when memories of the war are fading, to look back humbly on the past and correctly pass on the tragic experiences and history Japan pursued from the generation which experienced the war to those without direct knowledge." The challenge for Naruhito will be how to emerge from the shadow of his father and establish himself as a modern leader of Japan's ancient monarchy.
